Well, last year I got up here,
I was across the street,
and showed you what I'd been working
on for the last few months on OS X.
And it all was kind of basically working,
but there were a lot of underlying
things that we were kind of unsure about
in the kernel scheduling and all that.
And I'm really happy now because
not only did we finish everything
that we were showing last year,
but it's really performing well.
And towards the end of the session,
I'll have some demos that show
you exactly how well MIDI is
performing for us on OS X.
So before I get there,
I'm just going to give you
some introduction to the
system services for MIDI,
some of our design thoughts
and challenges that we had
in getting MIDI running.
I'm going to go through the basic
concepts of the API and some of
the objects you'll use in that API,
along with a lot of examples
as I go through the API.
And at the end, I'll have some demos.
- So in the large picture of things,
MIDI's a fairly low level service.
It's not in the kernel like I/O Kit is.
MIDI through its drivers
talks to I/O Kit.
to do MIDI.io.
But as we saw in the previous session,
there are some higher level
services like the audio toolbox,
which gives you ways
to send MIDI sequences,
edit MIDI sequences and send them
through to the MIDI hardware layer.
QuickTime is another example of
a higher level service that on
OS 9 is layered on top of MIDI.
And we've done some work to get
it layered on top of MIDI on 10.
And I'm not sure if it actually works.
There's a component in the
current build of OS 10.
And I'm not sure if it actually works,
but it will at some point.
So some examples of the kinds
of MIDI hardware that we expect
to be seeing drivers for.
People are mostly using
USB MIDI interfaces these days.
We're also seeing some USB synthesizers
like this Roland device I have here.
It's connected directly
to my PowerBook with USB.
We're still seeing
PCI cards that do MIDI.
And we're starting to see with
devices from Yamaha and others
some MIDI FireWire devices.
For the purposes of the MIDI API,
we don't really concern ourselves with
things that connect to MIDI interfaces,
like traditional MIDI devices,
drum machines, keyboards, samplers,
things that have traditional
MIDI cables on them.
So when I talk about a
MIDI device in the API,
I'm talking about one of these
things that connects directly to
the computer and is controlled
by a driver on the computer.
So when I talk about an
external MIDI device,
that's a traditional MIDI device
with a five pin connector on it.
So here are the goals that went into
our design for the MIDI services.
On Mac OS 9,
we started to see these trends towards
hardware and software developers
kind of doing their own thing to
make their own products work together
in a kind of closed system way.
And while that's okay, I mean,
there's some innovation that
goes on when people do that.
It's also a bit antithetical to the
spirit of MIDI in the first place,
which was that you could take a bunch
of gear from different manufacturers,
plug it in together,
and it would all work.
So what we want to do on 10
is try to support this kind of
interoperability that we've had in
the past with support for things
like timestamped MIDI interfaces.
And to get people to actually use
our services instead of trying to
hack down to the lowest levels of
the hardware or the OS like we've had
to as MIDI developers in the past.
Our goals are to really get performance
where it needs to be with good,
highly accurate timing,
both on recording of input
and performing outgoing MIDI.
Our goals are to have really low
latency with three times of under
a millisecond and low jitter in
the hundreds of microseconds range.
And I think we're pretty
close to those numbers,
as I'll show you at
the end of the session.
We want to present to the user
a single system-wide state.
We don't necessarily want to dictate
the user interface because MIDI users
might be using a fairly simple program.
They don't want a user interface designed
for helping him name his 55 synthesizers.
But then again,
there are people with 55 synthesizers
and they want to name them all.
And so we've taken the middle path by
providing a central system database but
not imposing a user interface on the way.
Sorry about that.
Skipping ahead rather quickly here.
A single system-wide state so that
all your MIDI programs will see the
same devices with the same properties.
And developers can add their
own properties to the devices
to make the system extensible.
So towards those goals,
we have a driver model so that the
hardware manufacturers can write drivers.
The MIDI server,
which we'll get to in a moment,
loads those drivers.
And then all the applications can
share their access to that hardware.
Everybody can send to that
same destination at once.
Everybody can receive
from a source at once.
And like I just mentioned,
we have a central device database.
And we provide for time-stamped
input and scheduled MIDI output.
And we also have some features
for inter-process communication.
So if you have, for instance,
a software synthesizer,
you could create it as a virtual
MIDI destination and have it
show up to other applications as
something you could send MIDI to.
Some other uses of that
might be MIDI effects.
And so I'll get to that.
And then we'll get to
the rest of the talk.
So those are the major features.
Here's a picture that gives
you an overview of how things
are actually implemented.
The horizontal gray lines
are address space boundaries,
which are kind of challenges
for the implementation.
That's where we have to move
data between address spaces
in a really efficient manner.
And I'm happy to say I think we're
doing that really well right now.
At the lower level,
we've got the kernel with I/O Kit.
Above that, we've got MIDI drivers,
which are typically I/O Kit user clients.
And they're loaded and managed
by a MIDI server process.
which gets loaded automatically
by the core MIDI framework which
your applications link with
in their own address spaces.
On the right,
I've got QuickTime here linking
with core MIDI just as an example
of how QuickTime is just another
application in this model.
So yeah, the core MIDI framework
is the purple boxes there.
And that manages communication with the
MIDI server using Mach messaging to very
efficiently move your data back and forth
between your application and the server.
So those MIDI frameworks
such as CoreMIDI,
there's actually two of them.
They're implemented as Mac OS libraries.
There's the CoreMIDI framework,
which is what applications link with.
And as I just mentioned,
that framework allows your clients,
it implements the API to the
MIDI server using Mac messaging
to the server process.
There's also a second framework
called CoreMIDI Server,
which is for the benefit
of driver writers.
This framework actually contains the
entire implementation of the MIDI server.
The MIDI server itself is a main
function that jumps into this framework.
And the framework loads drivers,
and then the drivers can link to the
framework to make callbacks into it.
So that way drivers have access
to almost the entire API.
I'm not going to go deeply into the
process of how to create a driver.
It's a little more esoteric.
There aren't as many of you who are going
to be interested in writing drivers,
but it's helpful for application
writers to know what the MIDI drivers
are doing because they kind of show --
they kind of set up all the information
that you end up seeing in your
application and you'll have to figure
out about installing them and that
kind of stuff as you start developing.
Apple is going to provide and
does provide in 10.0 a MIDI driver
for the USB MIDI class standard.
That's in the build now.
Unfortunately, no devices that I know of
are shipping that use it,
but someone's got to do something first,
so we're providing that driver.
For other pieces of MIDI hardware,
We expect manufacturers
to be creating drivers.
I know that several of you hardware
manufacturers are doing that.
And I would ask you application
developers who are eager for drivers
to get in touch with the people
who make hardware and ask them to
please give you a beta driver or
something so you can develop and
then you'll buy their hardware.
So, any case,
drivers get installed into the
system library extensions folder.
They're managed by the
MIDI servers I mentioned.
They use the CFPlugin mechanism,
which is a little daunting at first,
but we've got some example code
that makes it fairly easy to get
your first driver up and running.
And for most drivers,
no kernel extensions are necessary.
A USB MIDI driver, for instance,
works entirely as a USB user client,
so there's no kernel
extension needed there.
The basic functions of the MIDI driver,
there aren't very many.
All it really has to do is look for
hardware and once it's found it,
send and receive many messages,
typically using I/O Kit.
When it finds hardware,
it creates these objects
called the MIDI device,
the MIDI entity,
and MIDI endpoint objects,
and it sets their properties.
And those are objects that
you'll see in your application.
So let's look at what those look like.
From the bottom up,
there's a MIDI endpoint,
and it's simply a
MIDI source or destination.
It's a single 16-channel stream,
so you don't have to worry
about channel 72 on something.
You basically speak the standard
MIDI protocol over that stream.
The next layer up is the MIDI entity,
which groups endpoints together.
This is useful when applications
want to get an idea of which
endpoints go with each other.
From the point of view of, for instance,
a patch librarian program,
it's nice to be able to send messages
to a device and get messages back.
In a totally flexible world,
you could have the user say, yeah,
the out goes out port one,
but I'm getting the in
back in on port eight.
To provide useful defaults for people,
it's nice to be able to group the
endpoints like that so that an
application can make reasonable
default assumptions about how to
talk bidirectionally to a device.
So an entity, and this is a term borrowed
from the USB MIDI class spec,
an entity is really just one
subcomponent of a device.
So some examples of that would be,
for instance, an 8-in,
8-out multiport interface
like eMagix Uniter 8 could be
seen as having eight entities,
each with one source endpoint
and one destination endpoint.
Another example would be a hypothetical
device that had a pair of MIDI ports in
it and it had a general MIDI synth in it.
And conceptually,
those are two distinct entities
and your software might want
to present them as such.
- So the next level in the hierarchy
above the entity is the device,
which is something that you
would represent by an icon if
you were going to try to draw a
graphical view of what's there.
Devices are created and
controlled by drivers and they
contain the entity objects.
So now that we've seen those
basic objects that the driver
populates the system with,
we can start to look at how you
begin to sign into the system and
build the objects through which you
communicate with the MIDI sources
and destinations in the system.
So with OMS and MIDI Manager,
actually you had to say OMS sign
in or MIDI sign in before
anything else would work.
That's not totally true here.
You can actually interrogate the
system before making these calls,
but pretty early on in your program,
because you won't be able to do any I.O.
until you've done this,
you'll want to call a MIDI client create,
passing it a name and a function pointer.
In this case, it's called my notify proc,
and this function will be called
back to tell you about when
things change in the system.
The last argument to MIDI client
create is the client ref,
which you'll store somewhere in
your program and use in other calls.
- Once you've, oh, sorry,
I'm skipping ahead of myself.
A little more about the notify proc
that you passed to MIDI client create.
It gets called back in the same thread
which called MIDI client create,
which should ideally be
your program's main thread.
We may have some more fine-grained
notifications in the future,
but right now there's only one
which says something changed.
And that may be a device arrived,
a device disappeared,
some endpoints on a device
disappeared or appeared,
or the name of something changed.
That's what this message here is,
KMIDI message setup change.
Something about the system has changed.
So if you're caching in your
program's variables a picture
of what's in the MIDI system,
this is your message to say, okay,
it's time for you to resynchronize your
variables with what's in the MIDI system.
Once you've created your MIDI client,
then you create MIDI port objects.
And these are objects through which your
client actually sends and receives MIDI.
Not to be confused with
MIDI hardware ports,
like you would see on a MIDI interface.
These are more like,
if you remember MIDI Manager,
the little virtual triangles on
the ins and outs of your program.
Another analogy is Mach ports.
Those are your program's
communication receptacles,
you can think of them as.
To create an output port,
before I mention that,
one thing to know about output
ports is you only need one to
be able to send to all of the
MIDI destinations in the system.
One port can send to seven
different destinations.
One of the arguments when you send is
which destination you're sending to.
The only time you need to create
multiple ports is if you have a
kind of component-oriented program.
Maybe you've got five different
separately coded parts of your program,
and they're all acting very
independently of each other.
You would, in that case,
perhaps have five output ports,
each sending in a separate thread, even.
And what would happen is that the
MIDI server... would then merge
the output of those five ports.
So, in any cases where you're
sending in multiple threads,
especially where system-exclusive
messages are involved,
you need to be using separate ports.
As a really common example,
you might have a MIDI-through
process in your program that's
taking everything that's coming
in and sending it right back out.
And elsewhere in your program,
you might have...
[Transcript missing]
Similarly,
MIDI input ports may receive input
from all of the sources in the system.
A port is basically a binding,
well it's an object that contains
a connection point for input
and it gets bound to something
called a MIDI read proc,
which is a function that will get
called when input arrives at that port.
So the arguments to MIDI input
port create are a name,
a function pointer called
myreadproc in this case,
a null refcon or user
client data pointer,
and then you get back the MIDI port ref,
which is your input port,
and you would save that
away for use in other calls.
Okay, before we look at how to
actually perform MIDI I/O,
let's look at the data
structures in which MIDI messages
are sent and received.
We have this thing called
a MIDI packet list,
which provides a list of time stamped
packets to or from one endpoint.
You'll use this both in
receiving MIDI and sending MIDI.
It's a variable length structure,
which in turn contains multiple
variable length structures.
The first argument is simply
the number of packets,
and then it's followed by
MIDI packet structures,
which are variable length.
There can be any number of those.
The MIDI packet structure contains
one or more simultaneous MIDI events.
[Transcript missing]
There's a limitation that we don't want
you to mix system-exclusive messages
with other MIDI messages within a packet.
About the variable length
nature of these packets.
The first half of the slide shows
an incorrect example of how to
read through a MIDI packet list.
And what's incorrect about it is that
it's treating that packet member of
the structure as a fixed length object.
It's just, you know,
it's treating the packet
list as an array of packets,
but that doesn't work because
the packets are variable length.
So the right way to do it is
to first get a pointer to the
first packet in the packet list,
walk through each of
the packets in the list,
and then you use a very efficient
helper macro called MIDI packet next
to get to the next packet in the list.
and because these variable
length structures are a
little annoying to deal with,
we've also provided some
convenience functions for
when you're building them up.
There's MIDI packet list init
and MIDI packet list add.
The way they work in this example,
We're creating a 1K buffer on the stack
and casting it to a MIDI packet list.
So basically we're saying,
here's a MIDI packet list
that can be up to 1K in size.
Then with MIDI packet list in it,
we're setting it up so that
it contains no packets.
We're getting back a pointer to
the first empty packet in the list.
Then when we call MIDI packet
list add to add a node on event,
that node on event with its timestamp
gets appended to the packet list.
And if we have an array or if
we have a list of 50 nodes that
we want to add or other events,
50 events that we want to
add to this packet list,
we can successfully attempt to
call MIDI packet list add until
it returns null in curr packet.
And that's our clue that the packet has
become full and it's time to send it.
So that's a useful way to build up a
packet dynamically with correct syntax.
And this is just a summary
of the last two slides,
the convenience functions.
Okay, now that we've looked at the actual
format of our MIDI data and we know
about the MIDI endpoints and sources and
destinations that we see in the system,
we can look at the functions for
getting information about those
sources and destinations and
actually communicating with them.
This example here shows the two
functions for iterating through all of
the MIDI destinations in the system.
There's
MIDI_GET_NUMBER_OF_DESTINATIONS and
MIDI_GET_DESTINATION,
which just takes an
index as its argument,
a zero-based index.
And in this example,
we're calling MIDI send,
which is the basic I want
to send MIDI function,
obviously.
It's MIDI sends first argument is
the output port that you created
at the beginning of your program.
The second argument is a destination.
And the third argument
is a MIDI packet list.
So in this example,
we're sending some arbitrary
MIDI packet list to all of the
destinations in the system.
And here's a pretty parallel
example of how to find all the
MIDI sources in the system and
establish input connections to them.
The calls to iterate through
the sources are MIDI get number
of sources and MIDI get source.
And input's a little different
from output in that we can
always send to any destination.
There's no big deal about that.
But when we want to get
input from a source,
we have to tell the system,
I want to listen to that source.
Because otherwise,
we might have a situation where three
or four MIDI programs are running,
and there are five
MIDI controllers connected,
and someone's banging on
all those controllers,
and yet each program only wants
to be listening to one of them.
And it's best for system overhead if
clients are only delivered messages
from the sources that they're
actually interested in listening to.
So we require,
before a client gets any input,
that it will explicitly ask
for input from that source.
So that's what that call
MIDI port connect source does.
There's a parallel call
MIDI port disconnect source.
The last argument to
MIDI port connect source is,
a reference constant,
which will come back to your read proc.
And if you'll recall,
the read proc was an argument
when you set up your input port.
- So at the bottom there's the
prototype for the MIDI read proc,
which is your callback
function to receive MIDI.
It gets called back in a very high
priority thread that gets created on
your behalf by the core MIDI framework.
You need to be aware of any possible
synchronization issues with the data
that you're accessing in that thread.
Okay,
so we've looked at how to walk through
the sources and destinations in the
system and send and receive MIDI to them.
We can also look at the higher
level structures in the system,
which are the devices and
entities that the drivers created.
Using MIDI get number of devices,
MIDI get device,
MIDI get number of entities,
and MIDI get entity.
That's all really pretty straightforward.
So why would you want to do that?
There are times when you want
to walk through the endpoints,
the actual MIDI sources and destinations,
and those will exclude the
endpoints of any device which is
temporarily absent from the system,
which is good.
It will include virtual endpoints
created by other applications,
which is good.
And that's what you want to do when
you're trying to figure out what sources
and destinations you can talk to.
Now, there are other times when you
might want to draw the user a
picture of what's out there.
You know, I see this device,
I see that device,
it's got these entities in it,
and so forth.
And that's when you would walk through
the devices and entities in the system.
You will see the devices which
might be temporarily absent.
You won't see any virtual endpoints
because they're not really
associated with any devices at all.
And so again,
that's useful if you want to
present some sort of configuration.
configuration view of the system.
So speaking of devices, entities,
and endpoints,
they all have these properties.
The core audio framework
has properties on devices.
As we saw,
the audio units have properties.
This is a concept that we've
used rather pervasively as a way
to extensively add information
about the objects in the system.
Typically,
drivers will set attributes or properties
on their objects when they create them.
And typically, applications will just
read these attributes.
But the system is extensible
in that applications can add
their own custom properties to
devices if they want to do that.
An important feature of the property
system is that properties are
inherited down the hierarchy from
devices to entities to endpoints.
So in this example,
you can see that the device, the entity,
and the endpoint all
have different names.
The device's name is X999.
The entity's name is port1,
and the endpoint's name is port1n.
But you can see that the manufacturer
and model name are defined by the device,
and neither the entity nor the
endpoint override those properties.
And so you could ask the endpoint,
what is your manufacturer?
And it would say, well, I don't know,
but I know that my device's
manufacturer is XCorp,
so I guess that's mine.
and similarly the endpoint is inheriting
the SysX ID of 17 from the entity.
So some of the common properties
that we define are obviously the
name of the entity or object.
Devices have manufacturer
and model names and SysX IDs,
as I just mentioned in
the previous example.
Some other slightly obscure but actually
kind of important properties that
I'll get into a little later are the
maximum transmission speed to a device.
And this is important when you're
sending SysEx because MIDI is a
one-way protocol in a lot of cases.
In a lot of cases,
there are devices that you send,
you know, 100K of samples to,
and you just expect it to catch them all.
And you're not going to have any
way of knowing from the sending end
whether it actually got it or not.
Before we had high-speed transport
media other than the MIDI cable,
this wasn't really an issue because the
MIDI cable could only go at its speed.
But now that we have things
like USB devices in between our
computer and our MIDI cables,
it's important that the computer not
send more than 31,250 bytes per second,
the speed of MIDI, to an old MIDI device.
So that's a property of a
device that we can interrogate,
and I'll show you some examples
of using that a bit later.
Another property that you may see...
on some devices is a request from its
driver that you schedule its events
a little bit ahead of time for it.
And that's something else
I'll get into in a moment.
So continuing just on
properties in general,
here's an example of how to get
a string property of a device.
We use MIDI object get string property,
and that works for any of
the objects in the hierarchy,
devices, endpoints, or entities.
We're passing the K MIDI property name
constant to say which property we want.
We're getting back a
core foundation string,
CF name in this example,
converting it to a C string and using
printf to put it on the console.
One important thing that's illustrated
here is that a number of the MIDI calls,
I think it's all in the property world,
will return core foundation objects.
And when you get a core foundation
object back from a MIDI API,
it's your responsibility to
release it because you're being
given a new reference to it.
But fortunately,
things are a little easier with
numeric properties because we just
simply return a signed integer for
things like this property here,
which is the advanced scheduling
time in microseconds for a device.
And this is what I referred to a
moment ago about how some drivers wish,
when possible,
for you to schedule their output
a little bit into the future.
I will talk about that in a moment,
but first we have to understand
how the MIDI system expresses time.
We have a type called a MIDI timestamp,
which is simply an
unsigned 64-bit integer.
It's equivalent to host time, I'm sorry,
uptime, except that uptime returns a
structure containing two 32-bit
values that you have to...
We've chosen to use 64-bit integers
because you end up doing a lot of math
with these numbers and it's no fun
converting them to structures in Mac.
So we've got our own versions of these
calls that used to be in driver services
to get the current host time and to
convert it back and forth to nanoseconds.
And again, the host time is what in the
old days we called uptime.
I guess you can still call it uptime,
but we call it the host time.
That's the basic timestamp that we
use everywhere in the MIDI services.
So when we schedule our MIDI output,
we can either say send it right
now by passing a timestamp of zero,
or you can say I want to
schedule this at some time in the
future using a MIDI timestamp.
And what that will do is
in the server process,
it will add the event
or events to a schedule.
This schedule runs in a
Mach real-time priority thread,
which means it wakes up really
darn close to when it's supposed
to and will propagate your outgoing
MIDI message to the driver to be sent.
One thing to be aware of is that you
shouldn't schedule further in advance
than you're willing to really commit to,
because at the moment there isn't
a way to unschedule anything.
So if the user clicks stop and
you've scheduled two minutes of
MIDI to be played into the future,
it's going to play unless you
shut the whole system down.
This is intended just to give
you a tiny bit of breathing room.
I would say 100 milliseconds
is the outer bound of how far
ahead you'd want to schedule.
I'm aware of developers
scheduling at smaller intervals.
Anything over a couple of milliseconds
will take a little bit of strain
off the system and is helpful.
It's not essential to do,
but this is all in the interests
of getting really highly precise
timing out of MIDI hardware that
supports scheduling in advance.
and such devices that do have that
feature of being able to accept
scheduled output in advance will put
that property for a minimum advance
scheduling time on their devices.
So you as an application writer
can check that property and say,
oh, okay, this guy wants his MIDI,
you know, 1,500 microseconds in advance
or whatever his number is.
And that's your hint that you
can make that piece of hardware
perform better by giving it its
data that much further in advance.
Similarly, our incoming messages get time
stamped with the same host clock time,
audio get current hardware time.
If you want to schedule
your own timing tasks,
you can use the multiprocessing
services in Carbon.
And I touched on this
a couple slides ago.
It's best to schedule your output
a few milliseconds in advance and
combine your multiple MIDI events
that happen fairly close together in
time with a single call to MIDI send.
You don't have to do this.
You're still going to be
able to get pretty good
performance without doing this.
But when you do do this,
you are reducing the system load
and there's yet more CPU time
available for other things like,
you know, intense DSP operations.
We are getting really good latencies,
as I'm going to show you later on,
in moving the data around
from place to place.
But it is more efficient
when you can bunch up your
messages just the tiniest bit.
And these are some of the figures we're
starting to see in some of our tests.
Just in the software stack,
the MIDI through time is usually
well under one millisecond.
And our scheduler wake up jitter is
in the realm of 100 microseconds.
So if you say I want the scheduler
to wake up at such and such a time,
these are tests I've run on
my titanium power book here.
That's around the time
I'm seeing right now.
Before I actually show you some demos
that illustrate some of our timing,
I'd like to touch on a
couple of other things here.
We have some inter-process
communication features so that
your app can create virtual sources
and destinations which other apps,
including your own,
will see just as if they were
regular sources and destinations.
Here's an example of how
to create a virtual source.
You need to have that client ref that you
created at the beginning of the program,
my client.
You give your source a name.
You get back an endpoint reference to it.
And when you want to emanate
data from your virtual source,
you make a call called MIDI received,
which might seem like a
strange name at first,
but if you realize, okay,
I'm mimicking what happens in a driver
when it receives data from a real source,
you can do that.
You're saying, okay,
I'm pretending I'm receiving data,
but I'm a virtual source.
So that's why it's called MIDI received.
It's the same function a driver calls
when it gets data from a real source.
So you just pass out the virtual
source endpoint and the packet
list of data you want to send.
And any clients who are listening to that
virtual source will receive that data.
Virtual destinations are
the same but backwards.
You create a virtual destination,
pass it to your client, give it a name,
and then you create a
virtual destination.
You pass it a read proc,
which will get called when other clients
send data to your virtual destination.
We saw earlier in the talk how a read
proc looks and how it gets called.
And the other slightly obscure but
kind of important thing to go over
here is what happens when you need to
send large system exclusive messages,
as is common in patch librarian
and sample transfer applications.
You basically need to slow
down how fast you're sending
the data from the computer.
And there's two ways to do that.
One is to check that
property on the device,
KMIDI property max SysX speed,
and do your own math to break
up the message into chunks
so that over time you say,
okay, every second I'm not going to
send more than 3,125 bytes.
That's one way to do it.
Another way to do it is
to call MIDI send SysX,
which runs its own little
thread and does that for you.
Here's a brief example of how to do that.
This function is an example
of how to call MIDI Send SysX.
You fill out a MIDI Send SysX request
structure with your destination,
a pointer to your system
exclusive message,
its length,
and a pointer to a completion function
that will get called when the last
bit of that message has been sent.
Then you call midi send sysx,
passing it your request,
and it will go off and
asynchronously go send that data.
As with all asynchronous
functions like this,
and those of you who've been
programming Macintosh for a long
time all know about the problems of
param blocks with asynchronous calls,
you want to keep around that sysx
send request until it's completed.
You know,
this was a bad example in that it's a
local variable and I'm only vindicated
by the fact that I'm actually pulling
at the end of the function to see if the
request is complete before I'm allowing
that request to fall off the stack.
More typically you might put the
send request in a global variable
or somewhere else it's going to
persist beyond the function in
which you call midi send sysx.
As you saw when I was polling at
the end of the function on the
complete member of that structure,
You can look at that to tell
when the function is complete.
You can also look at the number of
bytes to send because if you initially
said I want to send 1,000 bytes,
as those bytes actually get sent,
that number in the
structure will decrement.
So you can watch the progress if
you want to put up a progress bar.
and David But going back
to the complete flag,
you can set that to true
and the system will say,
"Okay, I'm not going to send any more of
this." You can abort the request.
And the core MIDI framework will
implement this by running a medium
priority thread within your app.
It's a little higher priority
than your user interface,
but it's not a Mach real-time
thread by any means.
Okay, let's go over to the demo machine,
please.
I have two or three things
I'd like to show you here.
This is a program that will play audio.
If I just say... And I can have it
play just directly to the audio how.
Using the hardware timing
characteristics and play that
sound file as it really should be.
But I can also play this audio
file synchronized to MIDI timecode
in this example program.
Since I don't have a MIDI timecode
source piece of hardware
that was easy to carry here,
this is the least gear
I've ever taken to a gig.
And so we have in this window here,
and David A virtual source,
which is a MIDI timecode generator.
And as we see here in the video,
Playback Controller,
we have two choices of sync source.
We have the SK500,
which won't send us any
MIDI timecode and won't let us sync.
But we also have this virtual
destination sync source.
So this is stopped.
I can start the file player and it's
not going to start playing because
I haven't started the MIDI timecode yet.
This is unplugged.
I'm going to plug it in right now, OK?
Got it now?
So that's playing back
synchronized to the MIDI timecode.
I can very speed it.
I can slow down the rate.
[Transcript missing]
and Bobby Tavanian's keynote.
I've been adding features
to it since then.
We've got several components here.
At the top, we just have a simple
MIDI through generator.
Here we have a MIDI file player.
It can send through to
the Mac OS X music synth,
which is the DLS,
the downloadable sample synth
that Chris mentioned in his talk.
So let's just open a MIDI file
and send it to the internal synth.
What's interesting about this is that
this MIDI file player was designed
for playing to external hardware.
So it's waking up and saying,
"Play this now!" And the software
synth is responding that quickly.
We've got it programmed to be
processing in 64 sample frame chunks,
which is every one and
a half milliseconds.
Another little thing I'd like
to show you is that this is
my new feature in the program.
I wrote a little MIDI arpeggiator.
[Transcript missing]
The impressive thing about
this to me is that if I set
it up with some drum sounds,
we can start to get a sense
of how precisely the Mac is
spitting out the sound.
I don't know if I want
to have fun with that.
Thank you.
So here I'd like to trigger some
sounds being locally played here.
Let me make sure I have local control on.
Can you tell me for sure that
both the computer and the keyboard
are getting level right now?
Okay, here we go.
Now this is the computer alone.
Pretty similar on both of
them and is really percussive.
Okay, this is the Macintosh alone.
[Transcript missing]
On this test, I'm playing a sound
on the piano keyboard.
The lower graph
is the note just being
triggered from the keyboard.
The upper graph,
That note is traveling over USB from
the keyboard to the computer,
into I/O Kit,
up to the MIDI server process,
up to a MIDI through application,
back down to the MIDI server,
back down through I/O Kit in the kernel,
back over USB to the keyboard.
And we're getting one to two milliseconds
of delay between those two notes.
This is the one I meant
to show you first.
Here I was triggering-- actually,
this is a slightly different test.
I lied.
This is a different test I did yesterday.
But here I'm triggering both a
square wave being synthesized
through the audio HAL.
The Roland keyboard playing a rim shot.
And I'm taking excruciating steps
to make sure that they're being
triggered at the exact same time.
So from that time,
We're only hearing one millisecond
of difference between when the sound
comes out of the Macintosh and when
the sound comes out of the synthesizer.
The synthesizer being triggered
by MIDI is getting it first and,
you know,
it's optimized for this kind of thing.
But it's still only in the realm of
under two milliseconds between the
time we're telling the computer,
play this bit of audio,
and the time it comes out the speaker.
I think that's pretty impressive.
I think it's a testimony to the guys
in the kernel and the IOCit team.
It's just an amazing system and I'm
really proud of what they've done.
It's made it all possible for us.
So to sum up here, the MIDI services are
available in system 10.0.x.
There is some existing documentation
in the framework header files.
I believe one of them is
currently HeaderDoc'd.
The application one, the driver one,
is a little sketchier.
But all that's about to change.
At least on the application side,
we're going to have some
really extensive documentation.
Those of you who are working on hardware,
there's an example driver.
And you can get in touch with
developer relations and us,
and we can help you with
problems if you have questions
about driver documentation.
There are some examples
in developer examples,
core audio MIDI.
As Bill has been mentioning,
we are getting an SDK out soon.
We're hoping to improve
our documentation.
There should be some
more out really soon now.
Thank you very much.
If we can have the slides machine up,
that would be good.
I have just a brief walkthrough of
some of the Java code that does a
similar thing to what Doug's demo did,
just to sort of see the MIDI side
of what I showed last session,
and then we'll do some Q&A.
It'll
[Transcript missing]
Then I'm going to look to see if
there's a note on or a note off command,
and basically just
send that to the synth.
If it's not a note on
or note off command,
then I'm going to do some parsing
based on the MIDI spec of whether
it's going to have a two- or
three-byte data segment to it,
and then just send that.
Then all I do is send that
MIDI event to the music synth.
It's a fairly simple code to just
pull the MIDI data out of that packet.
There could be more than one
MIDI message in that packet,
so there's a little bit of work
you have to do to just parse it.
Then I just send that MIDI data.
If you look at the
interface of the program,
it lets you do some
alternate stuff on channels.
It lets you do some stuff
with transposing the data
and all that kind of stuff.
This example is a little bit
revised from what's available in
your developer section of your CD,
and we'll put this up on the
website as part of the SDM.
You can go to the CDK next week to
help you along with the Java stuff.
It's actually pretty similar
to the C stuff anyway.
If we could just go back
to slides very quickly.
So that's just the same thing
as I went through last session.
There's Java doc available
for this as well.
And it's really architectural rather
than language sort of specific
documentation that we're generating
that will be available on the website.
And the Java API presents the
same functionality as the C API.
Resources, we've got a mailing list,
list.apple.com,
and there's also developer website,
developer.apple.com/audio.
We're still in the process
of getting that website up,
so if you look at it
today or over the weekend,
it may not be the same as
what it will be next week.
So you might want to
check next week as well.
And we'll be getting stuff out.
There's some related session information,
and as with the end of Friday,
DVD people, you should look at it.
Freeze, pause that frame.
If you're doing any hardware development,
FireWire USB, if you're doing any sort
of PCI development that's
got to do with audio,
you can contact Craig Keithley.
He's the developer
relations person for that.
If you're interested in
getting access for seeding,
you can contact us at audio@apple.com.
And I'd like to thank you
all very much for coming,
especially late Friday afternoon.